---
title: Fixes To The Patriot Act Seen As Sufficient To Address Concerns
source: 
created: 2024-10-06 21:27:14-07:00
updated: 2024-10-10 10:49:43-07:00
tags:
  - Civil Liberties
  - post
date: 2005-10-30T12:23:00.000-08:00
published: true
url: /2005/10/fixes-to-patriot-act-seen-as-sufficient.html
aliases:
  - Fixes-to-the-patriot-act-seen-as-sufficient-to-address-concerns
linter-yaml-title-alias: Fixes-to-the-patriot-act-seen-as-sufficient-to-address-concerns

---cerns
---


Appropriate rational commentary on the specifics that need to be changed about the PATRIOT act to address privacy and governmental power and oversight issues.  
  
[](http://online.wsj.com/article_print/0,,SB110022195361672222,00.html)  
  
The Wall Street Journal  
  
  
November 12, 2004  
  
COMMENTARY  
  
  
Patriot Fixes  
  
By BOB BARR  
November 12, 2004; Page A12  
  
  
The most common charge levied against critics of the Patriot Act -- one  
that Alberto Gonzales, the new face of Justice, is likely to repeat in  
his days ahead -- is that they're "misinformed." Well, as a former U.S.  
attorney appointed by President Reagan, a former CIA lawyer and analyst,  
and a former Congressman who sat on the Judiciary Committee, I can go  
mano a mano with any law-enforcement or intelligence official on the  
facts. And the facts say that the Patriot Act needs to be reviewed and  
refined by Congress.  
  
Critics of the Act are not calling for full repeal. Only about a dozen  
of the 150 provisions need to be reformed; these, however, do pose  
singular threats to civil liberties. Here's how to bring them back in  
line with the Constitution.  
  
The two most significant problems are sections 213 and 215. The first  
authorized the use of delayed-notification search warrants, which allow  
the police to search and seize property from homes and businesses  
without contemporaneously telling the occupants. The Justice Department  
often claims that this new statutory "sneak and peek" power is  
innocuous, because the use of such warrants was commonplace before.  
Actually, the Patriot Act's sneak and peek authority is a whole new  
creature. Before, law enforcement certainly engaged in  
delayed-notification searches, especially in drug investigations.  
Importantly, this authority was available in terrorism investigations.  
Courts, however, put specific checks on these  
warrants: They could only be authorized when notice would threaten life  
or safety (including witness intimidation), endanger evidence, or incite  
flight from prosecution. It was a limited and extraordinary power.  
  
The Patriot Act greatly expanded potential justifications for delay. The  
criminal code now allows secret search warrants whenever notice would  
"jeopardize" an investigation or "delay" a trial -- extremely broad  
rationales. The exception has become the rule. Congress should remove  
that catch-all justification and impose strict monitoring on the use of  
these secret warrants.  
  
The other primary problem is the "library records" provision, Section  
215.  
This amended a minor section of the 1978 Foreign Intelligence  
Surveillance Act, which created a specialized court for the review of  
spy-hunting surveillance and search requests. This "business records"  
section allowed agents to seize personal records held by certain types  
of third-parties, including common carriers and vehicle rental  
companies. The Patriot Act made two changes to this relatively limited  
power: It allowed the seizure of any "tangible thing" from any  
third-party record holder (including medical, library, travel and  
genetic records); and it removed the particularized suspicion required  
in the original statute.  
  
Pre-2001, investigators had to show "specific and articulable facts" --  
a standard much lower than criminal probable cause -- that a target was  
a spy or terrorist. Now, that already low standard has been lowered  
further.  
Agents simply certify to the intelligence court that the records desired  
are relevant to an investigation -- any investigation -- and the judge  
has no real authority to question that assertion, rendering judicial  
review meaningless.  
  
Reformers on the left and right want two fixes to this section. First,  
reinstall the individualized suspicion requirement. This reflects the  
Fourth Amendment notion that the government cannot invade privacy and  
gather evidence unless it has reasonable suspicion that one has done  
wrong.  
The proposed "fix" would retain the section's broad "tangible things"  
scope, but with a safeguard against abuse. The authorities would still  
be able to go to a criminal grand jury to demand the production of the  
same records, providing additional flexibility for counterterrorism  
work.  
Second, Congress should require additional reporting requirements.  
  
There are other refinements desired by the Act's critics. The new  
definition of domestic terrorism in Section 802 can be used by  
prosecutors to turn on an array of invasive new authorities, including  
broad asset-forfeiture powers, even when the underlying crime does not  
rise to the level of "terrorism." The preferred legislative reform keeps  
the definition, but links it to specific crimes like assassination or  
kidnapping.  
  
Reasonable critics of the expansive provisions of the Patriot Act, on  
both sides of the aisle and in both Houses, have introduced legislation  
that would implement these modest changes. Far from gutting the Act,  
these would secure the important powers of the law, but place modest  
limits on their use. For most of us who voted for the Act, what sealed  
the deal was the inclusion of provisions that would require us to take a  
sober second look at the most contentious provisions in the Act by the  
end of 2005, before reauthorizing them. That time is coming, and the  
Justice Department does not want to lose the emergency powers it won in  
the aftermath of 9/11. But Congress should resist its overtures, move  
forward on the sunsets, and enact additional Patriot fixes if it  
believes them needed.  
  
Mr. Barr is a former Republican congressman.